# MSC3677: Rich text in room topics

## Problem

Topics are a central piece of room meta data and usually made easily
accessible to room members in clients. As a result, room administrators
often extend the use of topics to collect helpful peripheral information
that is related to the roomâ€™s purpose. Most commonly these are links to
external resources. At the moment, topics are limitted to [plain text]
which, depending on the number and length of URLs and other content,
easily gets inconvenient to consume and calls for richer text formatting
options.

## Proposal

To enrich `m.room.topic` events, we build upon extensible events as
defined in [MSC1767] and define a new `m.topic` event in `content`.
The latter contains a list of renderings in the same format that
[MSC1767] uses for `m.message` events.

``` json
{
    "type": "m.room.topic",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "m.topic": [{
            "mimetype": "text/html", // optional, default text/plain
            "body": "All about <b>pizza</b> | <a href=\"https://recipes.pizza.net\">Recipes</a>"
        }, {
            "mimetype": "text/plain",
            "body": "All about **pizza** | [Recipes](https://recipes.pizza.net)"
        }],
    },
    ...
}
```

A change to `/_matrix/client/v3/createRoom` is not necessary. The
endpoint has a plain text `topic` parameter but also allows to specify a
full `m.room.topic` event in `initial_state`.

Room topics also occur as part of the `PublicRoomsChunk` object in the
responses of `/_matrix/client/v3/publicRooms` and
`/_matrix/client/v1/rooms/{roomId}/hierarchy`. The topic can be kept
plain text here because this data should commonly only be displayed to
users that are *not* a member of the room yet. These users will not have
the same need for rich room topics as users who are inside the room.

## Transition

Similar to [MSC1767] a time-constrained transition period is proposed.
Upon being included in a released version of the specification, the
following happens:

-   The `topic` field in the content of `m.room.topic` events is
    deprecated
-   Clients continue to include `topic` in outgoing events as a fallback
-   Clients prefer the new `m.topic` format in events which include it
-   A 1 year timer begins for clients to implement the above conditions
    -   This can be shortened if the ecosystem adopts the format sooner
    -   After the (potentially shortened) timer, an MSC is introduced to
        remove the deprecated `topic` field. Once accepted under the
        relevant process, clients stop including the field in outgoing
        events.

## Potential issues

None.

## Alternatives

The combination of `format` and `formatted_body` currently utilised to
enable HTML in `m.room.message` events could be generalised to
`m.room.topic` events. However, this would only allow for a single
format in addition to plain text and is a weaker form of reuse as
described in the introductory section of [MSC1767].

## Security considerations

Allowing HTML in room topics is subject to the same security
considerations that apply to HTML in room messages.

## Unstable prefix

While this MSC is not considered stable, implementations should apply
the behaviours of this MSC on top of room version 9 as
org.matrix.msc3677.

-   `m.topic` should be referred to as `org.matrix.msc3677.topic` until
    this MSC lands

## Dependencies

-   [MSC1767]

  [plain text]: https://spec.matrix.org/v1.2/client-server-api/#mroomtopic
  [MSC1767]: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/1767
